wiki_trainer/README.md, before:

# Wiki Trainer

Utilities for turning Fastcrawl's Wikipedia chunks into Hugging Face datasets and fine-tuning a causal language model using `transformers` + `uv`.

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.13 (already provided by the `uv` shim installed at repository root)
- `uv` >= 0.9 for dependency + virtualenv management
- GPU drivers/tooling that can run PyTorch (install CUDA/cuDNN or use CPU for smoke tests)
- A local snapshot of chunks, e.g. `data/wiki_embeddings.jsonl` produced by Fastcrawl's embedder pipeline

## Setup

```sh
cd wiki_trainer
UV_CACHE_DIR=../.cache/uv uv sync  # creates .venv and installs dependencies (torch via the `training` extra)
source .venv/bin/activate
```

`uv sync` respects the `pyproject.toml` optional dependency group named `training`, so PyTorch + bitsandbytes are installed automatically. Adjust `UV_CACHE_DIR` if you keep cache files elsewhere (the repo root already has `.cache/uv`).

## Converting chunks to train/eval JSONL

Run the `prepare-data` subcommand to down-select and split the chunk corpus. By default it expects OpenAI-style embedding JSONL rows (with `text`, `url`, etc.), but it also works with normalized Fastcrawl pages that include `body_text` or `chunks[].text`.

```sh
uv run wiki-trainer prepare-data \
  ../data/wiki_embeddings.jsonl \
  --output-dir artifacts/datasets \
  --min-chars 200 \
  --max-chars 1600 \
  --max-chunks 50000 \
  --eval-ratio 0.02
```

The command writes `train.jsonl` and `eval.jsonl` into `artifacts/datasets`. Each row keeps the original text plus metadata columns (`source_url`, `chunk_id`, `section_path`) so you can trace model behavior back to specific chunks.

## Fine-tuning a model

Once the dataset exists, call `wiki-trainer train` with your preferred Hugging Face checkpoint. The defaults target `distilgpt2`, but you can swap in any causal LM (TinyLlama, Mistral, etc.) so long as it fits on your hardware.

```sh
uv run wiki-trainer train \
  artifacts/datasets \
  --model-name TinyLlama/TinyLlama-1.1B-Chat-v1.0 \
  --output-dir artifacts/checkpoints/tinyllama \
  --context-length 1024 \
  --epochs 2 \
  --batch-size 1 \
  --grad-accum 16 \
  --learning-rate 1e-4 \
  --eval-steps 100
```

The CLI wraps Hugging Face's `Trainer` so standard knobs (batch size, gradient accumulation, precision flags) are exposed. Logs/checkpoints land under `artifacts/checkpoints/...` by default.

## Tips

- **Filtering.** Increase `--min-chars` to drop stubby chunks or pass `--max-chunks`/`--eval-ratio` to control dataset size.
- **Precision.** Use `--bf16` or `--fp16` once your hardware + drivers support it; otherwise leave them disabled for CPU proof-of-life runs.
- **Custom schedules.** Edit `wiki_trainer/config.py` to add weight-decay or warmup strategies, then re-export the CLI arguments if you need more control.
- **Streaming/large corpora.** `prepare-data` currently loads the filtered samples into memory before shuffling. For multi-million chunk runs consider chunked pre-processing or swapping the implementation for a disk-backed shuffle buffer.

## Repository integration

The project stays isolated inside `wiki_trainer/` so it can evolve independently of the Rust crawler. Use `uv run wiki-trainer --help` to see every flag, and keep data artifacts under `wiki_trainer/artifacts/` (already referenced in the defaults) so they stay out of the Rust workspace.

Commit message:

feat: implement JAX trainer: pin JAX/MetraX to requested versions

wiki_trainer/README.md, after:

# Wiki Trainer

Utilities for turning Fastcrawl's Wikipedia chunks into Hugging Face datasets and fine-tuning a causal language model using `transformers` + `uv`.

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.13 (already provided by the `uv` shim installed at repository root)
- `uv` >= 0.9 for dependency + virtualenv management
- GPU drivers/tooling that can run PyTorch (install CUDA/cuDNN or use CPU for smoke tests)
- A local snapshot of chunks, e.g. `data/wiki_embeddings.jsonl` produced by Fastcrawl's embedder pipeline

## Setup

```sh
cd wiki_trainer
UV_CACHE_DIR=../.cache/uv uv sync  # creates .venv and installs dependencies (torch via the `training` extra)
source .venv/bin/activate
```

`uv sync` respects the `pyproject.toml` optional dependency group named `training`, so PyTorch + bitsandbytes are installed automatically. Adjust `UV_CACHE_DIR` if you keep cache files elsewhere (the repo root already has `.cache/uv`).

## Converting chunks to train/eval JSONL

Run the `prepare-data` subcommand to down-select and split the chunk corpus. By default it expects OpenAI-style embedding JSONL rows (with `text`, `url`, etc.), but it also works with normalized Fastcrawl pages that include `body_text` or `chunks[].text`.

```sh
uv run wiki-trainer prepare-data \
  ../data/wiki_embeddings.jsonl \
  --output-dir artifacts/datasets \
  --min-chars 200 \
  --max-chars 1600 \
  --max-chunks 50000 \
  --eval-ratio 0.02
```

The command writes `train.jsonl` and `eval.jsonl` into `artifacts/datasets`. Each row keeps the original text plus metadata columns (`source_url`, `chunk_id`, `section_path`) so you can trace model behavior back to specific chunks.

**Targeting specific facts.** Pass `--include-keyword "cherry hinton"` (repeatable) to only keep samples mentioning particular substrings, or `--require-keyword "cherry hinton hall"` to fail fast if the source corpus does not contain at least one chunk for that topic. This makes it easy to guarantee that the training data actually covers questions you care about.

## Fine-tuning a model

Once the dataset exists, call `wiki-trainer train` with your preferred Hugging Face checkpoint. The defaults target `distilgpt2`, but you can swap in any causal LM (TinyLlama, Mistral, etc.) so long as it fits on your hardware.

```sh
uv run wiki-trainer train \
  artifacts/datasets \
  --model-name TinyLlama/TinyLlama-1.1B-Chat-v1.0 \
  --output-dir artifacts/checkpoints/tinyllama \
  --context-length 1024 \
  --epochs 2 \
  --batch-size 1 \
  --grad-accum 16 \
  --learning-rate 1e-4 \
  --eval-steps 100
```

The CLI wraps Hugging Face's `Trainer` so standard knobs (batch size, gradient accumulation, precision flags) are exposed. Logs/checkpoints land under `artifacts/checkpoints/...` by default.

## Verifying coverage and chatting

Before training, you can confirm that a dataset actually contains enough signal for a question:

```sh
uv run wiki-trainer verify-question \
  "Where is the annual Cherry Music Festival held?" \
  --dataset-dir artifacts/datasets
```

The check scans the prepared JSONL files for overlapping keywords and exits non-zero if the topic is missing, prompting you to refine `prepare-data` filters.

After fine-tuning, chat with the checkpoint via:

```sh
uv run wiki-trainer chat artifacts/checkpoints \
  --dataset-dir artifacts/datasets \
  --max-new-tokens 160
```

The REPL refuses to answer prompts whose keywords do not appear in the training dataset, returning “I don’t know. That topic wasn’t in my training data.” instead of hallucinating.

## Tips

- **Filtering.** Increase `--min-chars` to drop stubby chunks or pass `--max-chunks`/`--eval-ratio` to control dataset size.
- **Precision.** Use `--bf16` or `--fp16` once your hardware + drivers support it; otherwise leave them disabled for CPU proof-of-life runs.
- **Custom schedules.** Edit `wiki_trainer/config.py` to add weight-decay or warmup strategies, then re-export the CLI arguments if you need more control.
- **Streaming/large corpora.** `prepare-data` currently loads the filtered samples into memory before shuffling. For multi-million chunk runs consider chunked pre-processing or swapping the implementation for a disk-backed shuffle buffer.

## Repository integration

The project stays isolated inside `wiki_trainer/` so it can evolve independently of the Rust crawler. Use `uv run wiki-trainer --help` to see every flag, and keep data artifacts under `wiki_trainer/artifacts/` (already referenced in the defaults) so they stay out of the Rust workspace.
